Four-story library building opened this summer, and a conservation laboratory, and a computer building.
And this summer when we cut the ribbons for three of these buildings, we had in attendance the three members of the Texas A&M administration who were on our board.
Ray Bowen was there with Sally.
Bob Walker was there with Joanne.
And Dean Jones was there with Mary Wolf, his wife.
And the American ambassador was supposed to come, but he couldn't.
His wife came in instead.
But it was quite a glittering event.
So when Texas A&M students come, they have a place to stay.
They have books to read.
They have all the facilities you need via Xerox machines and so forth.
And then when they go out to sea, we have our own research ship.
We have our own two-person submersible now.
We have all the necessary compressors.
In the summer we were running probably five compressors at once, electric generators, fresh water makers.
We have refrigerators, stoves, ovens, deep freezes for camps.
And so we supply all that abroad.
People often ask how it really works out, the affiliation between Texas A&M and INA.
And I think that the easiest way to explain it is Texas A&M is the academic arm and INA is the field arm.
so that we don't have to try to duplicate the Texas A&M library anywhere.
We don't have to try to duplicate the teaching facilities here, and we don't try to have a faculty everywhere.
The faculty goes to these places for a few months and then comes back, but this is our main headquarters, although we have a permanent headquarters in Bodrum with a year-round staff there, but we're not competing.
So it's a true partnership.
It's a real true partnership, and I hope that
This never ceases to be this way.
Donny Hamilton was talking to me the other day, and we don't always agree on everything.
He was head of the program when I, after I resigned the headship, I thought it was time for somebody to take, have another turn after I'd been that for 15 years or something.
Just as I resigned the presidency of INA after the first 10 years, and Don Freibachin president, I thought it was time for somebody else.
I took over the presidency once for a year and a half recently between presidents, but I haven't been president since.
But Donnie was talking to me just two or three days ago about when I retired, and he said, you know that
What gives the strength to the Nautical Archaeology program here and makes it unique in the world and attracts students from around the world is INA and the opportunities it offers students to go into the field and have publication opportunities alike.
At the same time, INA owes so much to being part of an academic program that can bring students.
When I formed the institute, I thought it was just going to be a few researchers working year-round at their research and we wouldn't have to teach and bother with all that stuff.
I think that the Cypress War, in its funny way, like every cloud has a silver lining, by forcing us to go back to a university
did again a wonderful thing for us because who are our main colleagues?
It's our own students when we go into the field and publish our sites.
So that's worked extremely well.
When you came here in the mid-70s, did you have any other program nationally or internationally that were your models that you were hoping to
We had no programs at all like this.
In fact, I modeled this more and more after the only thing I knew like this, which was the American School of Classical Studies at Athens for INA, but I didn't have anything to model it on, no.
What was the first big project you began after coming to A&M?
The first big project we started in 1977, the excavation of a wreck that sank about A.D.
1025 in a little natural harbor called Sertilimana, or Spare Harbor, Turkey.
And this little wreck that we found while living on these fishing boats in 73,
The curator of Islamic art in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, who's helping us publish it, wrote an article for the main journal of Islamic art studies and said that this excavation had revolutionized the whole study of the history of medieval Islamic art, or maybe Islamic art.
It produced the largest collection by far of medieval Islamic glass in the world, the world's oldest dated chess set,
the largest collection of Byzantine weapons ever found, the largest collection of Byzantine tools, an 11th century hull, which at that time was the oldest ship ever found built in the modern manner.
Now we've dug even older ones.
the best collection of medieval blaze pottery ever found.
I mean, it proved to be just a remarkable archaeological site.
Followed immediately by the excavation of the shipwreck that took 11 summers at Uluburun, Turkey, that has been called by
Scientific Americans discovering Archaeology magazine, one of the ten great archaeological discoveries in the world of the 20th century.
I mean, it is – everybody agrees it's the most important Bronze Age site dug anywhere in the Mediterranean in the last half century.
It's revolutionized our view of things.
We raised 18,000 catalogued objects, weighing 20 tons in all.
I turned over the direction of that.
to a young graduate student who happened to be Jamal Pulak after I did the first two years and he did the next nine.
We had 22,500 dives between 145 and 200 feet deep.
So those were the two major ones.
However,
We also did the oldest shipwreck ever found in the New World in the Turks and Caicos Islands, and a museum has been established on Grand Turk Island just for that.
That was done by Don Keith, one of our graduate students.
Donny Hamilton, at an invitation to INA, excavated Port Royal, the 17th century ship city that sank in an earthquake in 1692 when it was the richest of all the English colonies in the New World.
a famous pirate stronghold, and he ran that excavation for 10 years.
We did a 17th century Portuguese ship in Mombasa Harbor, Kenya.
And we saw to completion the restoration of this 4th century Greek hull in Kyrenia, Cyprus.
Even after the war, some people stayed on there.
and put that together, and then later a sailing replica of that was made with the advice of INA, but it was built by the Greeks, that retraced the original voyage, went through a full gale, has been exhibited in Japan, and was one of the ships that sailed up the Hudson River in the centennial of the United States.
It's a very famous replica that's seen around the world.
Describe for you, as a scholar, researcher, diver, excavator, describe
A typical day of underwater work, and what has to precede that day for you to be able to do what you need to do?
The first thing one has to do is find money.
And I sometimes think I've become a song and dance man for underwater archaeology.
I probably spend more time fundraising than any other single thing I do now.
Uh, and that's one of the reasons I'm retiring is, is, uh, so I'll be able to go to New York and California and places and not have to rush back to teach a class, you know, two days later because I've met some extraordinarily rich people who showed interest in their work and say, can you come to dinner after I've given a lecture, say, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art or the New York Yacht Club?
And I say, no, I'm sorry, I've got to go back and teach my class, you know, tomorrow or the next day.
So, uh, I, I do a lot of that and, um, so from
Well, I'll get into the details of that in a moment, but so it's a lot of fundraising grant.
I write grant proposals, but most of our funds come from individuals, and National Geographic has supported everything I've done for the last 40 years.
National Endowment with Humanity has supported everything I've done or one of my colleagues has done for at least last 25 years until this next year, and they've moved their date up so that it's almost impossible to meet it anymore.
I think September 1st, well you don't even know what you're going to do the next year because you're still in the middle of an excavation.
So you have to raise the funds.
Now, in the old days we had a lot of shipping and so forth, but we have a year-round staff now in Turkey that deals with this.
We have a mechanic, we have a ship captain, we have
chief divers, we have Don Frye who is a professional quality photographer now besides having a PhD in physics, so that I can really show up and the camp will be built and all I have to do is show up with the students, the ship will be in the water all painted freshly and so forth and overhauled.
So my main thing is that, but once we're there,
We usually have breakfast at 7.
We have a meeting right after breakfast.
And more and more I've turned this over to other people, like right at the moment my assistant director is Deborah Carlson, who is one of our students here, but is now getting her doctorate in Classics at the University of Texas at Austin.
because we want to hire her.
And so we said, Donnie Allenton and I said, don't stay here for your PhD because it'll make it harder.
But at any rate, but that person will then, usually with a plan of the wreck divided into grids, two meter squares, will assign each person exactly what they're to do.
And usually people have their own grid so that they can follow the excavation.
But she'll assign the dives and turn that over to the chief diver.
and say how many minutes each dive will last and how long they have to decompress and that sort of thing.
And one of the things is usually the first dive of the morning will be a photographic dive.
That's so that that could be the first dive of the afternoon when the water is clear, there's not been any air lifting or stirring up the mud, but the sun is high overhead.
We always have to work in the commissioner from the
Turkish Ministry of Culture who dives with us as part of the team.
And so we bring up artifacts.
In the old days when we started out, Anne would be the chief cataloger, the chief pot mender, the chief—she would even cook breakfast and do shopping.
Now we have professional cook, we have professional conservators.
So
There's always somebody in charge of every activity we do to guide the graduate students through it.
And most of our divers are our own graduate students, except for the permanent staff of INA, which over there now in Turkey is about half Turkish and half non-Turkish.
We have English, French, American, British.
We've always had a mix.
But let me say a little bit about Texas A&M.
Not only does it have this wonderful library and this wonderful reputation, but we've now worked in Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, the Caribbean, and our students have come to us from Belgium, Holland, France, Denmark, Finland,
the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Greece, Turkey, Israel, Australia, South Africa, Peru, Jamaica, Japan, China.
I mean, that is impressive.
That's one thing.
I think that one of the nicest things I can say is that the quality of the students I have here is every bit is the quality of the students I had at the Ivy League University of Pennsylvania.
No department is better or worse than its faculty, and we've now developed a good reputation, I guess, because our students
have no problem at all getting into Berkeley, Princeton.
We have three former students at Princeton right now working on doctorates.
Johns Hopkins, University of Michigan, University of Chicago,
Bryn Mawr, University of Pennsylvania.
So, I mean, who can complain?
I mean, we have everything.
We have a wonderful library.
We have wonderful financial support, and I'll come to that in a moment.
It just made me realize that.
We have the best faculty of its kind in the world.
There's been some concern because Dick Steffi and Fred Van Dornick have retired, and I'm retiring in a couple of weeks, but we have two very good candidates that are applying for the position that opened up when Dick Steffi retired, and then Fred Hocker took his place, but he's now gone to Denmark to be assistant director of their national program.
But with these young people we have in mind, I'm not at all concerned about the future of the program.
I was very, very worried a year or two ago because I thought we're just never going to be able to get the same quality of people that started it.
And once you put one or two mediocre people, then they're going to want other mediocre people.
And you can see a department disappear.
For example,
This is not necessarily because they were mediocre people.
I left Penn and I was attracting students.
Rodney Young, whose name I've mentioned, who is my professor there, the head of the department, was killed just two years later when he was 67 in an automobile accident.
What was the finest department in classical archaeology in the country, arguably,
within two or three years no longer existed.
It just folded.
It was absorbed by the anthropology or the art history department.
So it shows that it just takes the right faculty.
And that's what we've tried to keep up here.
And the same for INA.
I want to be sure that we're replaced by people with the same drive and stamina and so forth.
Now, the finances is interesting.
When we came here, I remember John Calhoun saying,
What would you do if we could give you $100,000 a year for a program?
And that would be to hire a secretary, pay for Xeroxing and all that, and student assistantship.
No, I'm not sure they come out of our hundred.
I think that's out of the Anthropology Department.
It is.
Uh, now, we, we, our budget, INA budget was fifty thousand, and the university was putting in a hundred thousand.
Several years later, after Jarvis Miller and, and interim acting, uh, President Sampson, um, when Frank Vandiver was president of the university, we had a board meeting in Jamaica so that people could see, uh, Port Royal.
At that time, Clint Phillips was on our board, uh, dean of faculties.
We approached Frank Vandiver, it was my idea, but I got the directors to do it, the people who were dealing much more with money, and said, look, when we came to Texas A&M, Texas A&M was contributing twice to the mix what I&A was.
But now I&A has raised its annual giving to, let's say, $250,000 a year.
And so it's got out of balance and don't you think we could get it better, can do better balance.
And Frank Vandiver said let's have a meeting on that in College Station and so Ray Siegfried and Jack Kelly and one other I think it was probably Gary Weber from Dallas came to a meeting with Frank Vandiver and I suspect it was Bob Walker and
And the proposal was made that he said if Don Frye, who was then our president and I, could make a case for another $100,000 a year to be put into it, that he would do that without going to the Board of Regents.
So Don and I got together.
We put together scrapbooks and slideshows and all this.
And one day we met.
And Gordon Eaton was then the provost.
And I remember that the dean of faculties was there and the president, Bob Walker, vice president of development.
I think the vice president of financial affairs was there.
And so we put on a show of what we were doing on our budget.
Well, somebody like Gordon Eaton from the physical sciences just couldn't believe that we ran ships and things on what to him seemed like, you know, mist and gauze and shoestrings.
So it was decided that they would put $100,000 into it.
Now, they can't just simply write a check to INA, but they can assign it to a faculty member who is part of INA and the faculty to be used for research.
And in fact, it just goes to help pay salaries and that sort of thing.
Before he left office, we'd grown to the extent that Frank Vandiver said he could raise it to $200,000, but not as a line item.
But he did it that year, and then it started getting reduced.
And then under Ray Bowen, it's gone back to $200,000 last year and the year before, and I think this year.
And we're going to see whether we can make something like that a line item so we don't have to worry each year about whether it's going to come to us or not.
But it's certainly appreciated now our budget.
has gone from fifty thousand dollars a year to about two million a year uh and so uh again oh one terribly important thing when the university had matching funds for endowed positions i uh started an endowment program and uh got a lot of our directors to endow positions um and uh
bob walker had found george amity to be on our board he endowed a professorship and a chair for nautical archaeology the chair is called a chair in liberal arts but he has written i think that he wants it to be used if there's a suitable person for nautical archaeology he's on our board and the professorship is in there so we have now chairs and professorships and that now
allows the faculty to pay a third of their salary.
So it doesn't come out directly out of INA funds, but it's due, it's responsibility.
Donny Hamilton told me a couple days ago that something like 48% of the endowment of the entire College of Liberal Arts are these nautical archaeology things.
It was millions of dollars.
However, it's not nearly enough.
I've seen the American School of Classical Studies go from a $12 million endowment when we were formed to over $100 million endowment, whereas we've gone from $50,000 a year and we don't even have a $2 million endowment yet.
I wish we had a $10 million endowment.
So that's part of the financial picture.
It's never fun to have to make our case every time a new president is
is brought in because, of course, some would say, what role does nautical archaeology play in a place whose tradition was not set up for nautical archaeology?
I know some of the regions have felt that way, for example, in the past.
But I think those days are gone.
Penn did make a mild unofficial stab at bringing us back there at one point.
Really?
That was interesting.
The head of the museum, because the museum is where all the archaeology is done, was down here lecturing, and we went afterwards to have a drink together, and he just said, what would it take to bring you people back, a new wing of the museum, or what?
I think it was the worst mistake ever made.
And I thought about it, and I wrote a letter to him.
I said, don't make us an offer because just like people don't necessarily just leave their wife for the next pretty girl to come along, I think there's a loyalty that you have to
to an institution that treats you well.
I said, if I ever leave Texas A&M, it would not be because somebody is enticed us away, it would be because I'm not happy to be there anymore.
And that was what I wrote.
And I mentioned it to Bob Walker, and he mentioned it to Jarvis Miller, who was, I think, almost unaware of our existence, and then became very friendly with us.
He came on our board, as a matter of fact.
Usually the president's on our board, and comes to the board meetings.
The Bowens come, whenever they're not a NCA meeting or something like that, that he has to go to, come to Dallas every year.
Now, I'm not going to ask negative.
Which presidents have been most supportive?
Without any doubt, I never met him, but I understand that Jack Williams really wanted us to come here.
John Calvin has told me that.
So, indirectly, I know that.
Frank Vandiver was a good friend of ours, I think, because he's a historian.
It's interesting, when I first met Frank Vandiver, he was, wasn't he at Rice?
He was at Rice.
I'm his first doctoral student.
Okay, he was at Rice, and we had a meeting about what to do with a Civil War ship found off the coast of Galveston, and there was a sort of a semi-treasure hunter type who taught physics at Rice, and Frank Vandiver and I had quite an argument
And it was rather heated.
So when he became president, I was worried that he might remember that and resent me.
So there was some function when I had to go through a reception with Ann to meet the president and his wife.
And we shook hands.
And he looked at me.
And I said, I'm George Bass.
I'm pleased to meet you.
And I thought, well, he doesn't remember me.
Thank goodness.
But a year or two later, at a board meeting or something, he says, you know, when George and I first met, we were looking down opposite barrels of the same gun, so he didn't remember it, but didn't let on.
He was a good friend.
I think we don't have a better friend than Ray Bowen, who has now come twice to Turkey for openings.
I'm sorry he didn't have time to stay and actually take a ride down in the little two-person submarine like Joanne and Bob Walker did.
But I think that his seeing what we have over there
has impressed him.
For example, we have now, we purchased
what was considered the finest private library of classical archaeology in the country.
About 4,000 volumes.
And we're adding to that.
Every book over there is also cataloged in the Texas A&M system.
And the head librarian's going over to look at it.
And every time we get a book, we have to Xerox the title page and the back page and the inside so we can get all the information to put it on notice.
So if you're in Japan and you look up, you know, Bass, the history of seafaring,
It'll say one copy in the Evans Library, one copy in the Bodum Library.
And so a lot of things that they have there, we don't even have here because we just ship the library in its entirety over there.
And the importance of having those on site is to use them as a reference.
It's phenomenal that while we're excavating, we can now actually bring out on the ship books on classical Greek lamps and pottery so that we can bring something out of the sea and date it instantly.
Whereas before, we'd have to wait maybe two or three months to come back with a photograph
Go to the Evans Library to do that.
Go back now on this day routine.
Let's make believe that George Bass today is going to go diving and he's going to go searching.
Take through the what did you do?
What would you have done on that day?
And how deep do you go?
And what do you eat and not eat?
Right now it's so professionally done and we have so much money to spend that everything works like clockwork, and so it's no longer roughing it like it was in the early days.
For example, we have a… Go back and do how it was then and then compare it to now.
Oh.
In Cape Gelidonia in 1960… No, no, the 70s, after you got there.
Okay, after the 70s.
We would have, you know, a lot of stews and beans and rice with just some local Turkish cook working for us.
We dived from an old wooden barge.
Actually, it wasn't so bad now.
And what kind of, what did you wear?
What kind of gear?
We wore the same kind of gear.
It hasn't changed that much, actually, in the last 25 years, which is what we're talking about, the last quarter of a century.
I'd say that the equipment, some of the equipment we were using goes back to those days.
Some of the compressors are 25 years old.
Some of our generators are 25 years old.
We've acquired since then our own 65-foot vessel.
It has a double-locked two-person recompression chamber in it, and it sleeps 12.
It has a little galley.
We use that on surveys, but when we were actually excavating, we had to have a camp because we had more people.
And so we get up, and we have our meal, and then we start the dives.
You can only dive 20 minutes twice a day to the wreck we're working on now, which is 140 feet deep.
So we go down and we airlift, which is we use a suction pipe to remove sediment, sweeping the sand toward its mouth.
When we find things we tag them, we have them photographed, we measure them in, and now we have computerized
program that allows us to make three-dimensional maps.
I'm so computer ignorant, I don't even have the slightest clue how it all works, but it looks beautiful.
Um, uh, we raise things to the surface if you're heavy with airfield lifting balloons.
Uh, it, we have a little, uh, one of the inventions of the Catsevs, when, uh, Michael Catsev was our
with us in the early days.
Actually, when he was one of my students, he and his wife had dreamed this thing up.
We called it our underwater telephone booth, and it's since been adopted by the Navy and industry, the diving industry.
It's a place of glass hemisphere, maybe three feet in diameter.
Yeah.
And it's chained down to heavy ballast on the seabed, and you put fresh air into that, and of course the air can't escape, so you've got a little trap bubble of air.
And so if you have an equipment failure or run out of air for some strange reason at 140 feet depth,
You swim over to this 15 feet away, stand up, and you're dry from your chest up, and you can talk to your partner, take out your mouthpiece, take off your mask, change your equipment, instead of worrying about going 140 feet up.
Our diving is very controlled.
I don't think we're necessarily all very good divers, even though we've dived thousands of times, because we get in the water, we go down a rope,
We usually just swim along it rather than go hand over hand.
That leads us directly to the foam booth.
We take our fins off and put them usually under the foam booth.
It's not totally safe to dive without fins because you lose mobility, but we don't want to stir up a lot of sand and mud by accident.
So we tiptoe around on the seabed and go to our square and work and then raise things at the end.
They then go to the
field conservator and they're uh the uh everybody actually takes a plays a role in it because it's kind of a heavy dirty work we have to take the sediment out of the amphoras and for the first uh 25 years i did this or 20 years uh we used to just hose them out and don keith one of our graduate students said to me what are you doing and i said we're getting the mud acid what about the seeds i said there's no seeds in there he said let me show you and now we we archaeobotany is one of the big things we do is we identify what these amphoras were carrying and
So we can find out now that a Bronze Age ship was carrying cumin and safflower and sumac and figs and things we've overlooked if it hadn't been for this one graduate student.
We can really learn from our students.
So we, we sieve the amphoras and get the mud out, clean them out and then with a little pneumatic
chisels.
We start to remove this rock-hard concretion from the seabed.
We do as much as we can there in the field, but eventually things go into the conservation laboratory.
We run inside the Bodger Museum of Underwater Archaeology, where we have a professional conservator and a staff of maybe ten people.
Now, after you identify something and make the photograph, how long is it normally before it is taken up to
We try to get it off the seabed as soon as we can because things can get broken by accident.
Somebody can step on something or drop something.
We've even seen fish burrowing around things.
There was an octopus that lived in an amphora on the glass wreck.
We call it the glass wreck with all this glass.
It used to come out and try to pull pieces of glass out of people's hands.
We named it Fred because that was in Fred Van Dornick Square.
So we try to get them up as soon as we can.
And they have to be kept in water all the time.
And then we don't actually start the desalinization.
Well, now we have a fresh water maker.
We actually start the desalinization process, which can take a year right there in the field.
And then when they go into the boat room, they're desalinated and then eventually cleaned and mended.
So after breakfast, you go get your suit on, go down, you're down 20 minutes, and then you can come back up.
Yeah, and we have to come up and decompress for a certain amount of time on pure oxygen.
That's something we started, and now it's done around the world.
We use tables designed specifically for us by Duke University, which has a very fine hyperbaric medical center.
And so it's, I think when I work at 20 minutes, it's like 10 minutes in the morning and 20 minutes in the afternoon, decompressing on pure oxygen.
We have a thing of iron bar to hang on to, and we feed fish and read books and things like that.
Paperbacks last forever underwater if you turn the pages carefully.
And then when we come up, there's always something to be done.
For example, if you came into our camp right now, one of the students, let's say they're all students, I mean we have other, would be timekeeping.
And they have a whole set of stop clocks sitting there in front of them, because there may be one dive down,
coming up another decompressing they have to be timing all these dives they have an electronic signal that gives a a whistling sound underwater and and one siren it means you've got two minutes before your dive is over so start putting your pencils and away and your measuring tapes and then the next one is a is a more like an ambulance uh in your beer sound and that means to come up your dive is over
And if the people don't come up, if the time beaver doesn't see them on the decompression stop, they'll send a signal down.
We have a little message board that goes back and forth on the string and saying, you have to decompress for 30 minutes, not 20, because you were late coming up.
So people don't like to be late, because it means hanging there in the cold water for an extra 10 or 20 minutes.
That person will be timekeeper.
Then there'll be somebody we call the barge chief, even though our barge sank 20-some years ago.
That is the person who makes sure that all the generators are turned on and off, the compressors are turned on and off, the fresh water maker's working, the salt water pump is working.
and is in charge of filling tanks and as soon as the tank comes up it has to go right on and be filled and we have to stack these up and so when you come up from a dive you will first remove your tanks give them to the barge chief who will usually have an assistant and then they